PMM-2344 fix - Document AMI instance class change without data loss (#244)
percona/pmm: doc/source/deploy/server/ami.rst

   .. include:: ../../.res/code/aws.ec2.get-console-output.txt

.. _upgrade-pmm-server:

:ref:`Upgrading PMM Server <upgrade-pmm-server>`
================================================================================

.. _upgrade-ec2-instance-class:

:ref:`Upgrading EC2 instance class <upgrade-ec2-instance-class>`
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Upgrading to a larger EC2 instance class should be straightforward as prescribed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgrading to a larger EC2 instance class is supported by PMM Server
```

from the `AWS manual <https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-instance-resize.html>`_.
The |pmm| AMI image uses a separate EBS volume for the |pmm| data and is
independently upgraded following the next section.

.. _enlarge-pmm-data-volume:

:ref:`Enlarging PMM Data Volume <enlarge-pmm-data-volume>`
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The |pmm| data volume is mounted as XFS on top of an LVM volume. There are two
ways to increase this volume as the |pmm| requirements change.

1. Add a new disk and expand the LVM volume using the new disk.

> 2. Expand the existing disk and grow the LVM volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Expand existing EBS volume and grow the LVM volume.
```

There is no significant difference or pros and cons between the two options.
Option one may have the advantage of growing the volume as the OS permits while
option two allows to snapshot the single disk from AWS console.

> Expanding Single Disk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expand existing EBS volume
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To expand the single disk to increase capacity, the following steps can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To expand the existing EBS volume in order to increase capacity, the following steps should be
```

followed.

1. Expand the disk from AWS Console/CLI to the desired capacity.
2. Login to the |pmm| EC2 instance and verify that the disk capacity has
   increased. From the ``dmesg`` output, you should see something like below::

     [  535.994494] xvdb: detected capacity change from 17179869184 to 34359738368

3. You can check information about logical volumes and volume groups with the
   ``lvs`` and ``vgs`` commands::

    [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# vgs
     VG     #PV #LV #SN Attr   VSize VFree
     DataVG   1 2 0 wz--n- <16.00g    0

    [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvs
     LV       VG Attr       LSize Pool Origin Data%  Meta% Move Log Cpy%Sync Convert
     DataLV   DataVG Vwi-aotz-- <12.80g ThinPool        1.74
     ThinPool DataVG twi-aotz--  15.96g 1.39  1.29|

> 4. Now we can use the ``lsblk`` command to see that our disk size has been read

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Now we can use the ``lsblk`` command to see that our disk size has been identified
```

>    by the kernel properly but LVM2 does not know about it yet. We can use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   by the kernel correctly but LVM2 is not yet aware of the new size. We can use
```

   ``pvresize`` to make sure the PV device reflects the new size. Once
   ``pvresize`` is executed, we can see that the VG has the new free space
   available.

   .. code-block:: bash

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lsblk | grep xvdb
       xvdb                      202:16 0 32G 0 disk

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# pvscan
       PV /dev/xvdb   VG DataVG    lvm2 [<16.00 GiB / 0    free]
       Total: 1 [<16.00 GiB] / in use: 1 [<16.00 GiB] / in no VG: 0 [0   ]

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# pvresize /dev/xvdb
       Physical volume "/dev/xvdb" changed
       1 physical volume(s) resized / 0 physical volume(s) not resized|

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# pvs
       PV         VG Fmt Attr PSize   PFree
       /dev/xvdb  DataVG lvm2 a--  <32.00g 16.00g

> 5. We can then extend our logical volumes. Since the PMM image uses thin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. We then extend our logical volume. Since the PMM image uses thin
```

   provisioning, we need to extend both the pool and the volume::

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvs
       LV       VG Attr       LSize Pool Origin Data%  Meta% Move Log Cpy%Sync Convert
       DataLV   DataVG Vwi-aotz-- <12.80g ThinPool        1.77
       ThinPool DataVG twi-aotz--  15.96g 1.42  1.32

>       [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvextend /dev/mapper/DataVG-ThinPool -l 100%VG

Reviewer: @fiowro do we always want ThinPool to be 100%?

Author: AFAIK it depends on situation. LVM with thin provisioning does not pre-allocate free space on logical volumes. This allows to have pool smaller than logical volumes allocated from it when these logical volumes have enough free (unallocated) space. But perhaps such variants are for some tricky custom mods, and not for the ordinary installation...

       Size of logical volume DataVG/ThinPool_tdata changed from 16.00 GiB (4096 extents) to 31.96 GiB (8183 extents).
       Logical volume DataVG/ThinPool_tdata successfully resized.

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvs
       LV       VG Attr       LSize Pool Origin Data%  Meta% Move Log Cpy%Sync Convert
       DataLV   DataVG Vwi-aotz-- <12.80g ThinPool        1.77
       ThinPool DataVG twi-aotz--  31.96g 0.71  1.71

6. On the previous step, we can see our thin pool is now reflecting the whole
   size of the disk, next is we need to extend the thin volume as well close to
   available pool capacity.

   .. code-block:: bash

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvs
       LV       VG Attr       LSize Pool Origin Data%  Meta% Move Log Cpy%Sync Convert
       DataLV   DataVG Vwi-aotz-- <12.80g ThinPool        1.77
       ThinPool DataVG twi-aotz--  31.96g 0.71  1.71

>       [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvextend /dev/mapper/DataVG-DataLV -L +19G

Reviewer: @fiowro How did you know to use 19G here? we should explain how this value is arrived at

Author: updated text with clarification of this moment.

       Size of logical volume DataVG/DataLV changed from <12.80 GiB (3276 extents) to <31.80 GiB (8140 extents).
       Logical volume DataVG/DataLV successfully resized.

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvs
       LV       VG Attr       LSize Pool Origin Data%  Meta% Move Log Cpy%Sync Convert
       DataLV   DataVG Vwi-aotz-- <31.80g ThinPool        0.71
       ThinPool DataVG twi-aotz--  31.96g 0.71  1.71

> 7. Lastly, we need to expand the XFS filesystem to reflect the new size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. We then expand the XFS filesystem to reflect the new size using xfs_growfs.  We then confirm the filesystem is accurate using the df command.
```

       Physical volume "/dev/xvdb" changed
       1 physical volume(s) resized / 0 physical volume(s) not resized

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# pvs
       PV         VG     Fmt  Attr PSize   PFree
       /dev/xvdb  DataVG lvm2 a--  <32.00g 16.00g

5. We then extend our logical volume. Since the PMM image uses thin
   provisioning, we need to extend both the pool and the volume::

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvs
       LV       VG     Attr       LSize   Pool    Origin Data%  Meta% Move Log Cpy%Sync Convert
       DataLV   DataVG Vwi-aotz-- <12.80g ThinPool        1.77
       ThinPool DataVG twi-aotz--  15.96g                 1.42   1.32

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvextend /dev/mapper/DataVG-ThinPool -l 100%VG
       Size of logical volume DataVG/ThinPool_tdata changed from 16.00 GiB (4096 extents) to 31.96 GiB (8183 extents).
       Logical volume DataVG/ThinPool_tdata successfully resized.

      [root@ip-10-1-2-70 ~]# lvs
       LV       VG     Attr       LSize   Pool    Origin Data%  Meta% Move Log Cpy%Sync Convert
       DataLV   DataVG Vwi-aotz-- <12.80g ThinPool        1.77
       ThinPool DataVG twi-aotz--  31.96g                 0.71   1.71

> 6. On the previous step, we can see our thin pool is now reflecting the whole

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Once the pool and volumes have been extended, we need to now extend the thin volume to consume the newly available space. In this example we've grown available space to almost 32GB, and already consumed 12GB, so we're extending an additional 19GB:
```

>    size of the disk, next is we need to extend the thin volume as well close to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>    the available pool capacity (adding 19 Gb should get our 12.80 enough close

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>    to 31.96).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
